Add node affinity feature enhancements  REP (#22)
ray-project/enhancements: reps/2023-02-03-node-affinity-feature-enhancements.md

3. Using labels to classify nodes and implement affinity/anti-affinity will be more natural and easier for users to accept.

### Implementation plan

![LabelsAffinity](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11072802/203686851-894536d0-86fa-4fab-a5fe-2e656ac198e5.png)

1. Add the labels data structure to the resource synchronization data structure(NodeResources). 
```
NodeResources {
  ResourceRequest total;
  ResourceRequest available;
  /// Only used by light resource report.
  ResourceRequest load;
  /// Resources owned by normal tasks.
  ResourceRequest normal_task_resources
  /// Map<label_type, Map<namespace, Map<label_key, label_value>>> Nodes labels information
  absl::flat_hash_map<string, absl::flat_hash_map<string, absl::flat_hash_map<string, string>>> labels;
}
```

2. When a node registers with GCS and broadcasts to all nodes, add the static labels information to NodeResources.

3. Scheduling optimization through Labels  
Now any node raylet has node static labels information for all nodes.  
when NodeAffinity schedules, if it traverses the Labels of each node, the algorithm complexity is very large, and the performance will be poor.   

> ** Therefore, it is necessary to generate a full-cluster node labels index table to improve scheduling performance. </b>

Reviewer: What's the index strategy for the more complex expressions such as negation and containment? I wonder if we need to cache the list of valid nodes per task/expression to avoid O(n^2) scheduling slowdowns with many nodes and tasks.

Author: This tag indexing strategy is actually very simple, I added it in the REP. The tag index only needs to get the nodes with these key&values.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11072802/217146026-762c5cb0-b608-46bd-88c8-7ece2bd9c2ee.png)

2. Improve the expression of NodeAffinity to support affinity\anti-affinity and labels expressions.
3. The actual principle of NodeAffinitySchedulingStratgy is. According to the label matching expression in the strategy, traverse and search for LabelsResource of all nodes. Pick out nodes that meet the expression requirements.

![NodeAffinity Concept](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11072802/217133358-19ddc916-bf15-4f69-96e1-9cbd157b0e1d.png)

Scheduling Policy | Label Owner | Label select operator
-- | -- | --
NodeAffinity | Node | in, not_in, exists, does_not_exist

### API Design

**The apis of actors/nodes add labels**  
This interface is already very simple, so we will not set up multiple solutions for everyone to discuss.
```python
#  Node add static labels. 
ray start ... --labels={"location": "dc_1"}

# Dynamically updating node labels is not implemented now, and will be considered in the second stage.
```

**The apis of the actor-affinity/node-affinity scheduling.**  

**Option 1: Simplify through syntactic sugar**

```python
# Scheduled to a node with a specific IP.
actor_1 = Actor.options(

>         scheduling_strategy=node_affinity(label_in(key="node_ip", values=["xxx.xxx.xx.xx"], is_soft=false))

Reviewer 2: Minor, but seems like we don't really need the `node_affinity` wrapper here?

Author: The benefits of wrapping with node_affinity here are as follows:
1. The label representation in node_affinity can be multiple. So it needs to be wrapped with node_affinity
```
# Multiple label expressions can be filled in at the same time, and the relationship between the expressions is "and". The dispatch must satisfy each expression.
# The actual meaning of this expression is that it must be scheduled to a node with a GPU, and as much as possible to a node with a GPU of the A100 type.
actor_1 = Actor.options(
        scheduling_strategy=node_affinity([
            label_in("gpu_type", ["A100"], true),
            label_exists("gpu_type", false)
        ])
    ).remote()
```
2. After actor_affinity also intends to introduce label expressions. At that time, actor_affinity & node_affinity can reuse the four expressions label_in\label_exist at the same time. The code implementation can be more concise and easier for users to understand.
```
Actor.options(
        scheduling_strategy=node_affinity(label_in(key="node_ip", values=["xxx.xxx.xx.xx"], is_soft=false)).remote()

Actor.options(
        scheduling_strategy=actor_affinity(label_in(key="actor_type", values=["dog"], is_soft=false)).remote()

```

    ).remote()

# Schedule to the node with the key label exist "gpu_type".
actor_1 = Actor.options(
        scheduling_strategy=node_affinity(label_exist("gpu_type"))
    ).remote()

# Don't schedule to the node with the key label exist "gpu_type".
object_ref = Task.options(
        scheduling_strategy=node_affinity(label_does_not_exist("gpu_type", is_soft=false))
    ).remote()

# Multiple label expressions can be filled in at the same time, and the relationship between the expressions is "and". The dispatch must satisfy each expression.
# The actual meaning of this expression is that it must be scheduled to a node with a GPU, and as much as possible to a node with a GPU of the A100 type.
actor_1 = Actor.options(
        scheduling_strategy=node_affinity([
            label_in("gpu_type", ["A100"], true),
            label_exists("gpu_type", false)
        ])
    ).remote()

# Note: This api is old. The old api will still be kept for compatibility with old users.
actor_1 = Actor.options(
    scheduling_strategy=NodeAffinitySchedulingStrategy(
        node_id=ray.get_runtime_context().node_id,
        soft=False,
    )
).remote()

> def node_affinity(...):

Reviewer 2: Instead of introducing a new `node_affinity` wrapper, we can just swap out the `NodeAffinitySchedulingStrategy` implementation to use labels instead.

Author: Same as above explanation. Label expressions are planned to be used in more places in the future. For example, ActorAffinity or get a batch of nodes through label. So it's better to wrap it with node_affinity/NodeAffinitySchedulingStrategy here. Then the label indicates that it can be reused in multiple places.
```
# get a batch of nodes through label.
Nodes = GetNodeInfoByLabel([label_in("zone", ["usa", "china"])
```

Reviewer 3: i think that's option2 right?

Reviewer 4: Not exactly. Option 2 doesn't have `label_in` etc?

Author: @jjyao  Do you mean "scheduling_strategy = NodeAffinitySchedulingStrategy([label_in("zone", ["usa", "china"]])?  

NodeAffinitySchedulingStrategy is replaced by node_affinity mainly for more concise and language style more in line with python.

Reviewer 3: @larrylian we can stick with NodeAffinitySchedulingStrategy for the first version, and improve that in a separate PR.

Author: @scv119  Do you mean "scheduling_strategy = NodeAffinitySchedulingStrategy([label_in("zone", ["usa", "china"]])" ?    
It's ok to do that。

                    label_in("gpu_type", ["A100", "P100"], is_soft=true),
                ]).remote()
```

**FAQ:**  
This node static labels seems to be very similar to custom_resources. Why not use custom_resources to instance of node_affinity?

1. The semantics of static labels and custom_resources are completely different. custom_resources is a countable resource for nodes. And labels is an attribute or identifier of a node.
2. Now custom_resources cannot implement the function of anti-affinity.
3. Using labels to classify nodes and implement affinity/anti-affinity will be more natural and easier for users to accept.

### Implementation plan

![NodeAffinity Concept](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11072802/217133358-19ddc916-bf15-4f69-96e1-9cbd157b0e1d.png)

1. Add the labels to node info
```
message GcsNodeInfo {
  // The ID of node.
  bytes node_id = 1;
  ...
  // The user-provided identifier or name for this node.
  string node_name = 12;
  // The static labels of nodes.
  map<String, String> labels = 13;
}
```
2. Add the labels data structure to the resource synchronization data structure(NodeResources). 
```

> NodeResources {

Reviewer 2: Wouldn't we need to add the label shapes requested by tasks to the ResourceRequests?

Author: This is for synchronizing the Node Labels information to each raylet node in the Raylet scheduling mode.
1. Putting it in NodeResources can reuse the existing resource synchronization mechanism without creating a new label synchronization mechanism
2. Adding labels here can also allow ActorAffinity to reuse this mechanism.
3. Under the Raylet scheduling mechanism, after the scheduling is completed, the local node needs to confirm whether the final resources meet the requirements. So it is convenient to put it here for final confirmation.

Reviewer 3: Since ResourceRequest is also used for autoscaling, seemingly we need to add label requests as well.

Author: Ok I'll try to update a rough design by next week

  ResourceRequest total;
  ResourceRequest available;
  /// Only used by light resource report.
  ResourceRequest load;
  /// Resources owned by normal tasks.
  ResourceRequest normal_task_resources
  /// Map<label_type, Map<namespace, Map<label_key, Map<label_value, ref_count>>>> Actors/Tasks/Nodes labels information
  absl::flat_hash_map<string, absl::flat_hash_map<string, absl::flat_hash_map<string, absl::flat_hash_map<string, int>>>> labels;
}
```

3. When a node registers with GCS and broadcasts to all nodes, add the static labels information to NodeResources.  

Because NodeInfo originally had a mechanism to synchronize to the entire cluster. So there is no need to modify too much code.

4. Scheduling optimization through Labels 

Now any node raylet has node static labels information for all nodes.  
when NodeAffinity schedules, if it traverses the Labels of each node, the algorithm complexity is very large, and the performance will be poor.   
<b> Therefore, it is necessary to generate a full-cluster node labels index table to improve scheduling performance. </b>

> The label index table is only used to obtain which nodes have this key and value. The complexity of this algorithm is O(1).

Reviewer 2: If there are multiple expressions to match, I think it will be O(kN) (k = num expressions, N = nodes), though, right?

Author: Yes, In a scene with many expressions, each time an expression is processed, fewer and fewer nodes meet the requirements. Performance is good.

    "memory": xx,
    "custom_resources": xx,
    "actor_labels_key@value": 1,
    "task_labels_key@value": 1,
    "node_labels_key@value": 1,
}
```
If you put labels into custom_resources, you need to do the following adaptation:
1. Compared with custom_resources, labels need to add a specific prefix to distinguish them from custom_resources.
2. The key and value of Labels need to be concatenated with special characters (@).
3. When using Labels to build a Labels index table, you need to parse the resources key.

**DisAdvantages:**
1. Labels unlike cpu resource these are numeric types. Compared with the above scheme. This will destroy the concept of coustrom resouce.
2. Actor and Task are isolated by namespace. It is difficult to isolate through namespace if adding custom_resource.
2. The Label index table of all nodes can be constructed from the ActorLabels information of each node. If you use Custom Resource, this requires parsing the resource_key and doing a lot of string splitting which will cost performance.
3. If custom_resource happens to be the same as the spliced string of labels. Then it will affect the correctness of scheduling.

### AutoScaler adaptation

> I understand that the adaptation of this part of AutoScaler should not be difficult. Now NodeAffinity is just one more scheduling strategy. Just follow the existing implementation of AutoScaler and adapt to the current strategy.

Reviewer 2: This proposal is more advanced than the autoscaling for NodeAffinity.

NodeAffinity is only used for nodes that are already in the cluster, so I believe the only change there was to make sure that the autoscaler didn't mistakenly start additional nodes for a queued task that wouldn't actually be able to be scheduled there.

Since this proposal is for more flexible labels, we will need the autoscaler to be aware of which nodes it should add or remove from the cluster based on the label constraints of queued tasks. So this actually is something the proposal should cover. Specifically:
- what API changes do we need at the cluster config level and for the interface between the autoscaler and the GCS?
- what will the autoscaler policy look like?
- Handling scalability issues? (If an application uses too many different label policies, we'll have to report these in the task load)

Reviewer: Yeah I don't think this is quite so simple. The autoscaler runs emulated bin-packing to determine what types of nodes it needs to add to the cluster. For example, suppose a user requests {"dc": "zone-1"}. Then, the autoscaler will need to run its bin packing routine with this request and node labels in mind, in order to determine the nodes to launch: https://github.com/ray-project/ray/blob/master/python/ray/autoscaler/_private/resource_demand_scheduler.py

As you can see, the logic is algorithmically complex.

My assessment is that we probably need to refactor the autoscaler to unify this bin packing routine with the C++ implementation, to avoid having to write label affinity evaluation in both Python and C++.

## Summary
### General Motivation

> The current node affinity feature is relatively simple, it can only affinity with one node. 

Reviewer 5: "it can only affinity" -> "it can only support affinity"

Author: done

Many general functions cannot be supported.

Current node affinity feature don't support functions:
1. Don't support affinity to a batch of nodes. Current only support affinity to one node.
2. Don't support anti-affinity to a node of a batch of nodes. 
3. Don't support to classify nodes by labels, and then affinity or anti-affinity to a certain type of nodes.
4. Don't support affinity/anti-affinity to nodes by node ip or node name. Current only support node id identification.

This REP is to solve the above problems.

### Should this change be within `ray` or outside?

Yes, this will be a complement to ray core's ability to flexibly schedule actors/tasks/node.

## Stewardship
### Required Reviewers
 
@ericl @stephanie-wang @wumuzi520 SenlinZhu @Chong Li  @scv119 (Chen Shen) @Sang Cho @jjyao (Jiajun Yao) @Yi Cheng
### Shepherd of the Proposal (should be a senior committer)

> 

Reviewer 5: This is a required piece of information. I suggest @scv119

Author: Agree . I will add it.

2. Now custom_resources cannot implement the function of anti-affinity.
3. Using labels to classify nodes and implement affinity/anti-affinity will be more natural and easier for users to accept.

### Implementation plan

![NodeAffinity Concept](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11072802/217133358-19ddc916-bf15-4f69-96e1-9cbd157b0e1d.png)

1. Add the labels to node info
```
message GcsNodeInfo {
  // The ID of node.
  bytes node_id = 1;
  ...
  // The user-provided identifier or name for this node.
  string node_name = 12;
  // The static labels of nodes.
  map<String, String> labels = 13;
}
```
2. Add the labels data structure to the resource synchronization data structure(NodeResources). 
```
NodeResources {
  ResourceRequest total;
  ResourceRequest available;
  /// Only used by light resource report.
  ResourceRequest load;
  /// Resources owned by normal tasks.
  ResourceRequest normal_task_resources
  /// Map<label_type, Map<namespace, Map<label_key, Map<label_value, ref_count>>>> Actors/Tasks/Nodes labels information

>   absl::flat_hash_map<string, absl::flat_hash_map<string, absl::flat_hash_map<string, absl::flat_hash_map<string, int>>>> labels;

Reviewer 3: For node affinity where the node labels are static, we don't need this complicated labels data structure, but only `map<String, String> labels` is sufficient?

Author: Yes. map<String, String> labels is sufficient.  Here we can use a concise data structure first. Change it later when we need to expand.

1. resources are enough, but node_id of affinity don't exist. -> throw exception, compatible with current behavior 

2. resources are enough, but labels affinity  cannot be satisfied? -> Hang & report schedule failed event and detail unstaisfed reason to exposed to users

3. labels affinity can be satisfied, but resources are not enough? -> Hang & report schedule failed event and detail unstaisfed reason to exposed to users

4. both labelsaffinity and resources are not satisfied? -> Hang & report schedule failed event and detail unstaisfed reason to exposed to users

### how other system achieve the same goal?
1、K8s
This solution is to learn the PodAffinity/NodeAffinity features of K8s。
https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/scheduling-eviction/assign-pod-node/#affinity-and-anti-affinity

Scheduling Policy | Label Owner | Operator
-- | -- | --
nodeAffinity | NODE | In, NotIn, Exists, DoesNotExist, Gt, Lt
podAffinity | POD | In, NotIn, Exists, DoesNotExist
podAntiAffinity | POD | In, NotIn, Exists, DoesNotExist

### what's the alternative to achieve the same goal?

> ** Option 3: putting Labels into the custom resource solution  **  

Reviewer 4: Not necessarily saying that I'm proposing this but have we considered label being a k-v pair vs a string. Does a string label have the same expressiveness as a k-v label? A good thing of string label is that it can be easily implemented as custom resources internally.

Author: @jjyao 

>have we considered label being a k-v pair vs a string?
We should have discussed this before, and now the form of key-value should refer to the best form of other excellent experience.

1. The (key-value) labels mechanism of K8s is one of the highlights of K8s and has been recognized by countless people.
2. The key-value is simple and can be accepted by users naturally. But at the same time a certain flexibility can be submitted. For example: {gpu_type: "A100"} , {gpu_type: "T100"} . This setting is very natural and intuitive. But if it is replaced by a string: {"gpu_type@A100"},{"gpu_type@T100"}. It will be a little troublesome for users.

> implemented as custom resources internally

This issue has been discussed before. NodeAffinity uses custom_resource internally. Wouldn't be a good solution. It not only destroys the semantics of the original custom_resouce, but also the code implementation will be more complicated (1+1)> 2.

https://github.com/ray-project/enhancements/pull/13/files?short_path=5ae2129#diff-5ae21290dd6f2483719e2557543e9335c1867bea3d1f1cfe516e269d0bd9bc12

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/11072802/221743480-5b6c13fa-c4ba-4335-9495-86a53589675b.png)

> label_not_in(key, values[]) = All_Nodes - LabelManager.GetNodesByKeyAndValue()

```
class ClusterLabelManager {
 public:
  absl::flat_hash_set<NodeID> GetNodesByNodeKeyAndValue(const std::string &key, const absl::flat_hash_set<std::string> &values) const;

  absl::flat_hash_set<NodeID> GetNodesByNodeKey(const std::string &key) const;

  void AddNodeLabels(const std::shared_ptr<NodeInfo> &node);

  void RemoveNodeLabels(const std::shared_ptr<NodeInfo> &node);

 private:
 <label_key, <lable_value, <node_id, ref_count>>>> labels_to_nodes_;
}
```

### If the Match Expression Cannot be satisfied
If the matching expression cannot be satisfied, The actor/task will be add to the pending queue. Util the matching expression all be statisfied.

1. resources are enough, but node_id of affinity don't exist. -> throw exception, compatible with current behavior 

2. resources are enough, but labels affinity  cannot be satisfied? -> Hang & report schedule failed event and detail unstaisfed reason to exposed to users

3. labels affinity can be satisfied, but resources are not enough? -> Hang & report schedule failed event and detail unstaisfed reason to exposed to users

> 4. both labelsaffinity and resources are not satisfied? -> Hang & report schedule failed event and detail unstaisfed reason to exposed to users

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
4. both labels affinity and resources are not satisfied? -> Hang & report schedule failed event and detail unstaisfed reason to exposed to users
```

Author: done
